# wtc4_heatwave
Heat wave in the fourth whole-tree chamber experiment.

This repository contains R code to process climate, physiology, and growth data from a whole-tree chamber heatwave experiment at Western Sydney University. 

To use this code, I recommend that you clone this repository into an Rstudio project by copying the SSH (or HTTPS) link on the right, and pasting the link into a new Rstudio project URL (File > New Project > Version Control > Git). You will also need git. This process is described in useful detail here: http://www.molecularecologist.com/2013/11/using-github-with-r-and-rstudio/ . The code within "analysis.R" will download all of the raw data, place them in the "data" folder, and recreate all of the figures and tables in the "output" folder. Send John an e-mail if you have trouble, and he will try to help you out (jedrake AT esf.edu).

Experimental details

A locally endemic and threatened woodland tree species (Eucalyptus parramattensis) was selected for this experiment. Seed was acquired from Harvest Seeds and Native Plants (Terry Hills, NSW, Australia) and germinated in a local shade house. Six potted seedlings were placed into each whole-tree chamber (WTC) and the experimental warming treatment (+3 deg C) was initiated on 28 Oct 2015. One seedling was planted into the soil within each WTC on 23 Dec 2015; at that time average seedling height was 60 cm.We added a heatwave treatment to the long-term warming treatment, resulting in a 2x2 factorial design with three replicate trees in each treatment combination (n = 3). As heatwaves often occur during conditions with low soil water availability, we withheld irrigation for one month, leading to dry surface soils during the heatwave. We then implemented an experimental heatwave during the Austral Spring-Summer, consisting of four sunny days with a maximum Tair of 43-44 °C and a maximum VPD of 5-6 kPa. We considered this an extreme but biologically reasonable “heatwave of the future” for this location. We measured whole-canopy exchanges of CO2 and H2O, leaf temperatures, leaf thermal tolerance, and leaf and branch hydraulic status.

Three provenances of Eucalyptus tereticornis (Eute) were grown under 6 temperature regimes in the S39 glasshouse from 7 Jan 2016 through 7 Mar 2016. The three provenances of Eute were labelled A, B, and C. A came from the southern (cold) end of the distribution (seedlot 17770 from the Australian Tree Seed Centre) near Buckenbowra NSW (-35.4 deg lat, 150.07 deg long). Provenance B came from the northern (warm) end of the distribution (seedlot 18589) north of Cairns QLD (-15.5 deg lat, 145.1 deg long). C came from the middle of the distribution (seedlot 20352) near Googa QLD (-26.6 deg lat, 152.0 deg long). All plants were kept "well-watered" apart from provenance B, which was subject to a water limitation sub-experiment. "Bw" was kept well-watered, and "Bd" was subjected to water limitation (details below). Seed was propogated by Greening Australia and seedlings ~10 cm-tall were delivered. These seedlings were transplanted into PVC pots (size?) and 15 potted trees of each provenance-treatment combination (A, Bw, Bd, and C) were placed in each of six glasshouse bays. The glasshouse bays maintained mean daily temperatures of 18, 21.5, 25, 28.5, 32, and 35.5 degrees C, with a 9 degree C diurnal temperature range. Note that this is a very wide range in temperature.

Water-limitation experiment

There was a water-limitation sub-experiment; note that this was not included in Drake et al. manuscript entitled "A common and broad thermal niche among geographically diverse populations of the widely distributed tree species Eucalyptus tereticornis: no evidence for adaptation to climate of origin". Plants labeled Bd and Bw were maintained at equivalent soil moisture in room 1 (the coldest room), and the quantity of water added to these pots was recorded. In the warmer rooms (2-6), Bw was kept well-watered, but the Bd plants were given the same quantity of water that was added to the Bd plants in room 1. In this way, the intensity of the water-limitation treatment increased along with temperature, but the total water added to all Bd plants was equivalent.
